# Disclaimer!

This is Part of a series on solving LeetCode problems and understanding rounded solutions with ChatGPT to master DS&A as a self-taught programmer. Check other solutions in here for something more sophisticated and short. Here I do explain the solutions including the optimal one but rather go in depths on my experience confronting the question as an intermediate level self-taught programmer.

# On Bit Manipulation

Encountering this problem, I hadn't worked with the XOR operation in depth this way before. I think I've seen a few bit manipulation problems (which is one of the tags), but this problem leaned more toward understanding the XOR operator's properties than just manipulating bits.

## Initial Thoughts

My read-through of the problem wasn't great. It was late, and my energy levels might have affected comprehension.

I remember the frustration from the first time 6 months ago when I came across this problem and realized how crucial it is to understand the solution past the attempt, even when you can't solve it yourself.

The first attempt, in retrospect, felt like a wasted effort as it didn't add much to my understanding of this second encounter, which felt equally challenging.

The encoding part was particularly intimidating due to some past unpleasant experiences with similar problems. I ended up thinking that, without prior knowledge of the XOR operation's properties, solving this seemed like a long shot, but playing around with bits did teach me a few notions.

## The Solution

The breakthrough came when I grasped the XOR property, where `A XOR B XOR A` leaves you with `B`. Essentially, any value XORed twice within a chain of XOR operations cancels out, leaving the unaffected values.

The key to the problem's solution is recognizing how the first number in the original list `perm` was the only one not used twice in generating the encoded array.

Then follows that having the first number and the encoded list, one can deduce the rest of the numbers in the original list `perm` by XORing the first number in there with the first in the encoded to get the second in the original, and so on.

```python
class Solution:
    def decode(self, encoded: List[int]) -> List[int]:
        ans = [0]
        for i in encoded[::-2]:
            ans[0] ^= i

        for e in range(len(encoded) + 2):
            ans[0] ^= e
        
        for j in range(1, len(encoded) + 1):
            ans.append(ans[j-1] ^ encoded[j-1])
        
        return ans
```

The implemented solution reflected this understanding. I initiated an answer list with zero (`ans = [0]`), exploiting the property that `A XOR 0` equals `A`. I then XORed every other number from the encoded array into a single value, representing the first half of the XOR operations we are going to need to do, giving us as a result a XOR of all the numbers from the original list missing only the first number from the original `perm` array.

I ran another loop, this time through numbers from 1 to `n`, XORing them into the previously obtained value.

This effectively canceled out all elements except the first one in the original list (because I don't have it in half the XORs but do in the other, and every other XORed value is XORed twice, so they cancel out).

In the final loop, I generated the rest of the numbers in the original list using the first element and the encoded array, following the logic elucidated earlier: taking `perm[0] XOR encoded[0]` to produce `perm[1]` and so on - `perm[i] = perm[i-1] xor encoded[i-1]`.

On Assumptions and ChatGPT
--------------------------

This problem was a primer on XOR operations and their properties. Without prior knowledge, solving it would be near impossible.

The constraints and nomenclature were manageable, though the nuances around XOR required some attention.

The hints provided didn't do much for me initially since the crucial XOR property wasn't evident at first.

Interaction with ChatGPT, although a bit misleading because basically listed all properties of XOR at once, eventually led me to the XOR property that broke the problem wide open.

The problem also brushed on the broader concept of array manipulation and value conversion, albeit in a language-specific manner. It's more of a brain teaser grasping the XOR property.

Optimization
------------

Exploring other solutions further on LeetCode, I stumbled upon the `reduce` and `accumulate` Python functions, which mirrored the problem's requirements.


```Python
class Solution:
    def decode(self, encoded: List[int]) -> List[int]:
        XOR_all = 1 if (len(encoded)+1) % 4 == 1 else 0
        XOR_tail = reduce(XOR, encoded[::-2])
        return accumulate(encoded, XOR, initial=XOR_tail ^ XOR_all)
```

### Python Specialized Functions

`reduce` functionally XORs one value with the next sequentially, leaving a single value at the end that is like the cumulative XORed value of everything.

At the same time `accumulate` does something similar but with an initial value, against a second list, and returns a list where each element is the result of one XOR operation at each step - Which results in the rest of the `perm` array.

### Optimizing Half the Xor Operations

Interestingly, from peaking at rankings for most optimized solutions a pattern emerges while XORing numbers from 1 to `n`, where `n` is always odd in this problem.

```
 Number (n) | XOR from 1 to n
------------|----------------
    1       |        1
    3       |        0
    5       |        1
    7       |        0
    9       |        1
    ...     |       ...
```

The XOR of all numbers 1 to `n` alternates between 1 and 0 for odd values of `n`, reflecting a fascinating optimization opportunity for a constant XOR of all items from 1 to `n`.

This problem was a blend of bit manipulation, understanding XOR operations, and recognizing patterns, like a brain teaser more like working on DS&A, as I said.

Thank you for reading!

#medium
#leetcode