This one is 4th on a series of posts I've written of my in-detail facing of LeetCode questions as an intermediate self-taught programmer. I've been using ChatGPT and other resources for assistance in understanding statements and solutions. Have a script for generating next optimal question to try and solve and I'm working a method out for efficiently mastering DS&A while documenting that very same process.

I hope you guys enjoy and give some love so I optimize for the places to publish this in. I'm due to make this into a GitHub repo where I'd publish both the ChatGPT conversations, these posts, and my solutions for people to reference from a single place.
# The statement

## 1636. Sort Array by Increasing Frequency

Given an array of integers `nums`, sort the array in **increasing** order based on the frequency of the values. If multiple values have the same frequency, sort them in **decreasing** order.

Return the _sorted array_.

**Example 1:**

**Input:** nums = [1,1,2,2,2,3]
**Output:** [3,1,1,2,2,2]
**Explanation:** '3' has a frequency of 1, '1' has a frequency of 2, and '2' has a frequency of 3.

**Example 2:**

**Input:** nums = [2,3,1,3,2]
**Output:** [1,3,3,2,2]
**Explanation:** '2' and '3' both have a frequency of 2, so they are sorted in decreasing order.

**Example 3:**

**Input:** nums = [-1,1,-6,4,5,-6,1,4,1]
**Output:** [5,-1,4,4,-6,-6,1,1,1]

**Constraints:**

- `1 <= nums.length <= 100`
- `-100 <= nums[i] <= 100`

## Initial Thoughts

I've come across similar problems before, and just wrote in my database notes that this one seemed familiar. The second hint on the problem suggests coding a custom comparison function for whatever sorting algorithm I'd choose to sort the list with.

In the middle of this and thinking about some other reddit thread I read on it, I got curious about using C++ for these given that, as far as I know, doesn't have the specific helper functions Python does. With Python, you just give the sorted() function or sort method a key and you're good. The actual key you pass to it can be a tuple of keys, and the first key sorts the elements out. If there’s a tie, the second key in the tuple breaks it and so on. That's the demand here.

## My Script-Driven Question Selection

I recall confronting another problem where I learned from ChatGPT about passing a tuple of keys to Python’s sorted function and the sort method for lists. This insight proved handy not only for other problems but also for managing the database of my Django script, which gives me optimal questions for practice.

My script fetches questions from the least understood topics from my database. If two tags have the same percentage of questions not understood, I need a tie-breaker to avoid random selection between those matching rows. One of the other keys I use is 'least selected'. So I prioritize questions on topics I understood the least, then those I selected the least.

This multi-instanced familiarity with the concept made it easy to recognize the solution to the LeetCode problem.

## Reflecting on Past Approaches

I remember pasting and submitting solutions from others before on many problems earlier this year because I couldn’t fathom solving them myself, nor believe other user's solutions could, so I would test them with the LeetCode interface. What is on my LeetCode accounts submissions section is someone else’s solution I saw since I didn’t grasp any of it back then.

Reading this problem felt like a breeze. The easy label on LeetCode was a good to see lol, I guess kind of affirming they do a good job at labeling questions under this difficulty. A lot of times they fail at labeling with medium and hard ones, although overall I've come to understand that difficulty is also relative, and in many ways subjective.

The question seemed straightforward then. Despite the myriad of LeetCode questions, understanding the overarching topics represented by tags is what one should focus on as they encapsulate a bunch of problems' essence.

This problem, labeled with sorting and hash table, had a hint of the later, though exaggerated because a simple count strategy does the job. The discussion had a mix of opinions on the difficulty level, but to me, it was easy, provided you have a grasp on the topic, just like the XOR problem I discussed yesterday here, that I didn't have a chance of solving without knowing about XOR's properties.

## Solution Breakdown

In the solution, the first key on a tuple sorts the array based on the value frequency, hence the need to count the frequency first. Every solution I’ve seen employs a Hash Map (or dictionary), with some using a count function in Python. I toyed with the idea of a counting sort, but deciding the size of the initial array seemed inefficient.

Various submissions across different solution types had a close runtime and memory margin, so I didn’t bother optimizing further.

```Python
class Solution:
    def frequencySort(self, nums: List[int]) -> List[int]:
        counts = defaultdict(int)
        for num in nums:
            counts[num] += 1
        return sorted(nums, key=lambda x: (counts[x],-x))

```

The code first counts the number of appearances with a dictionary, then employs the sorted function on the original nums array.

This approach generates a sorted array.

Though using the sort method could have been more memory efficient since we don't generate a second array, but modify the inputted one.

Python kind of shines here, allowing a key function for sorting, and in this case, a lambda function returning a tuple. The first key is the count of appearances of X on the original nums array, and the second key we make be -X, effectively inverting the order of numbers with the same count.

The peculiar part of this problem is the key functions concept. If unfamiliar, it can be tricky to see how you can manage sub-sequences or sub-lists in a range of a list or reverse the order based on certain conditions. Understanding key functions and how conflicts are resolved when two elements share the same key is vital.

## Prior Knowledge

The discussion section revealed some found the problem challenging, yet with some experience in reading statements correctly and understanding the topic, it becomes straightforward. Similar to the XOR question, without prior knowledge, solving this problem would be an uphill task. But now, having encountered this concept multiple times, it’s become ingrained, enabling me to tackle more advanced problems.

This time reading the problem, the dual-key sorting clicked instantly. I jumped into coding right away, something I don't usually do unless I'm super confident about the problem statement. I used to fail this part initially, where my ignorance would blind me, leading to an overestimation of my problem-solving ability. Reality started hitting when I faced a few problems, realizing that the difficulty range was wider than I initially thought. Each problem sheds light on knowledge gaps.

## Core Concepts

This problem offers a glimpse into hash tables or dictionaries and sorting with key functions—basic yet essential concepts in handling data structures and algorithms. When guiding someone else through this problem, I’d emphasize understanding sorting algorithms and particularly the comparison functions used as keys for sorting criteria. It’s crucial to adhere to the problem statement, avoid assumptions, and use hints provided in the code. Sometimes, a peek into discussions can offer valuable insights or even solutions. 

At some point while confronting another problem the concept in the solution for this one made part of, queried ChatGPT for help an a complex line with Python's sorted function, revealing the chain of keys concept used to resolve equality conflicts during array sorting.

I thought about sorting at first but coding a custom sorting function didn’t cross my mind. This scenario made me think about exploring solutions in C++, sparked by a Reddit thread emphasizing optimizing algorithms using faster languages. I might stick with Python for now, familiarize myself with data structures and algorithms, and perhaps, dive into C++ for a fresh perspective on tackling LeetCode problems could offer a second wind moving forward.

## Optimization and Performance

In terms of optimization, various solutions proposed different manipulations and reconstructions of the original array, which I wasn't super interested in. The runtime and memory statistics were roughly the same, and the only simplification could be leveraging more Python built-in methods to count and sort, possibly reducing the code to a two-liner. But that wasn’t a priority.

## Closing

Checking the rankings, it's evident that for Python, everyone seems to follow the two-pass approach—first through the list to count appearances, and second for sorting. The worst-case time complexity with Python’s Timsort is O(n log n), which is the overall time complexity for this problem, resonating as n + n log of n. So that's basically it.

Thanks for reading!


#r/leanprogramming